---
title: "Advent of Code 2020 (3rd week)"
date: 2020-12-21T19:40:07+01:00
tags: ['programming', 'python', 'advent-of-code']
---

There's been some days in which I really struggled to find a working solution (that provides an answer in a reasonable amount of time) and I didn't even try day 20, but overall I'm really happy to have arrived that far. 

## Day 14: Docking Data

Docking Data could be seen as another VM problem, as it was [day 7](/posts/advent-of-code-2020-week-2/#day-8-handheld-halting). But this one was _only_ about changing an input mask and writing values to memory addresses.

The hardest thing for me was to expand masked inputs to generate all the possible addresses.

👨‍💻 [My solution](https://github.com/jordinebot/advent-of-code/blob/main/2020/day-14/main.py)

## Day 15: Rambunctious Recitation

That one hit home. The problem seemed easy enough (it was about expanding a sequence to find the nth term given a couple of rules). I saw in Reddit that many people had issues understanding the description. Surprisingly, that was not my problem today. So, after some back and forth I got my method providing the 2,020th value of the _spoken number_ series.

For part 2 I was expecting some changes (complications) on the generation rules but instead the question simply to get the 30,000,000th number spoken. Damn it. My method required reversing the sequence and finding an index by value **in every iteration!**, so I knew I was fucked.

I improved my solution using a dictionary to store the latest index of every spoken number and I finally got my answer in about 20 seconds. Far from optimal, for sure, but good enough.

👨‍💻 [My solution](https://github.com/jordinebot/advent-of-code/blob/main/2020/day-15/main.py)

## Day 16: Ticket Translation

That puzzle required more data parsing than the usual and, to be honest, I like that. I understand that programming puzzles are meant to be about algorithms and complexity, not parsing text. But at the same time, parsing is usually an easy challenge that I find sort of relaxing.

Once the data was parsed, we got some rules (being each rule a _key_ and a couple of integer ranges), our ticket (a list of integers) and a list of _nearby_ tickets.

The puzzle was about using the list of tickets together with the rules in order to find out the meaning of each number on the ticket. To solve it I iterated over the list of tickets finding _key_ candidates where rules were satisfied for that particular index in all tickets. When I found an index with just one candidate, I ruled that one out and continued with the others.

Unfortunately, with my method, two iterations to the list of tickets where required in order to find the solution. I'd like to know if a single one should be enough but honestly, I'm doing AoC after work and I don't have that much time left to think about optimisations.

👨‍💻 [My solution](https://github.com/jordinebot/advent-of-code/blob/main/2020/day-16/main.py)

## Day 17: Conway Cubes

Another puzzle inspired in Conway's Game of Life, like in day 11. This time it was in 3D, with cubes but there wasn't a size limited grid so you didn't have to care about edges when looking for cubes' neighbours. So it was, in fact, easier than day 11 to me.

Part 2 was just adding another dimension to the problem. Having a good data model for part 1 it was just a matter to add an extra coordinate.

I learned about [itertools](https://docs.python.org/3/library/itertools.html).

👨‍💻 [My solution](https://github.com/jordinebot/advent-of-code/blob/main/2020/day-17/main.py)

## Day 18: Operation Order

As the name suggests, Operation Order, was a problem about modifying operator precedence in arithmetic expressions with integers, additions, multiplications and parentheses.

Part 1 was about ignoring the usual precedence of product before addition (respecting parentheses though), and I solved it using two stacks (one for operators and another for operands) as well as recursivity for expressions within parentheses.

Part 2 was the first puzzle that I left unsolved this year. The challenge this time was to invert the usual precedence making addition to be evaluated before multiplication. I thought about it for a while without coming out with anything useful and at the end I ran out of time...

👨‍💻 [My solution](https://github.com/jordinebot/advent-of-code/blob/main/2020/day-18/main.py)

## Day 19: Monster Messages

I had a hard time with this one. The problem input was some kind of [context-free grammar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Context-free_grammar) like:

```
0: 4 1 5
1: 2 3 | 3 2
2: 4 4 | 5 5
3: 4 5 | 5 4
4: "a"
5: "b"
```

that would generate strings with `"a"` and `"b"` characters. As well as some _messages_ for which you should tell if they could be generated by that grammar or not.

The specific question _Your goal is to determine the number of messages that completely match rule 0. [...] How many messages completely match rule 0?_
tricked me into trying to generate all the possible strings (the problem made it clear that there weren't any loops in the rules) to just compare with the messages afterwards. I ended up with multiple nested lists that I couldn't manage to successfully flatten into the strings.

After a while I realised that I could convert these nested lists into regular expressions and just match them with the messages... and it worked!

Part 2, as you could expect, introduced loops by modifying a couple of rules in the input:

```
8: 42 | 42 8
11: 42 31 | 42 11 31
```

I must say I _cheated_ this one with an ad-hoc solution that modified the output for these specific rules for something that'd fit my regular expressions solution:

```python
loops = {
	'8': '( 42 + )',
	'11': '( 42 31 | 42 {2} 31 {2} | 42 {3} 31 {3} | 42 {4} 31 {4} | 42 {5} 31 {5} | 42 {6} 42 {6} )'
}
```

Obviously I'm not specially proud of this one, but it got the job done.

👨‍💻 [My solution](https://github.com/jordinebot/advent-of-code/blob/main/2020/day-19/main.py)

## Day 20: Jurassic Jigsaw

Jurassic Jigsaw was the only puzzle for which I didn't even get the first star. I started in late afternoon, it was Sunday, and the problem looked pretty complex... so I started creating some methods to get the borders of the tiles, I investigated how to use [NumPy](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/routines.array-manipulation.html) for flipping and rotating arrays... and then I just gave up before even trying to write the algorithm to put everything together.

🤷‍♂️ No solution